deformable convolution (#89)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2022-11-14-DeformableConvolutionalNetworks.md

---
layout: review
title: "Deformable Convolutional Networks"
tags:  Convolution, recepteive field, atrou
author: "Nolann Lainé"
cite:
    authors: "Jifeng Dai, Haozhi Qi, Yuwen Xiong, Yi Li, Guodong Zhang, Han Hu, Yichen Wei"
    title:   "Deformable Convolutional Networks"

>     venue:   "Microsoft Research Asia"

Reviewer: The venue is meant to refer to the conference/journal where the paper was published, not the affiliation of the authors. From the GitHub repo, the paper was published at ICCV 2017.

P.S. The PDF does not always make it clear what the venue was, so often times it requires looking up the paper or the authors :wink: 

```suggestion
    venue:   "ICCV 2017"
```

Author: I make a note of it, thanks! :)

> pdf: "https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.06211v3.pdf"

Reviewer: I typicall prefer not to refer to a specific version of an arxiv paper (the `v3` at the end here) so that URL always leads to the most recent version.

---

# Notes

* Code is available here: [repo]( https://github.com/msracver/Deformable-ConvNets)

# Highlights

* The objective of this paper is to propose a method to adapt CNN to different geometries.
* The innovation comes from the addition of layers that learn the "stride" in order to have filters on a non-regular grid.
* The proposed method is interesting for classification, segmentation and object tracking tasks.
&nbsp;

# Introduction 

> For a neural network, geometric transformation, viewpoint and partial deformation are difficult to learn. Most of the time, to generalise an architecture during learning, known geometric deformations such as scaling, rotation or shearing are applied. 

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
For a neural network, geometric transformations, viewpoints and partial deformations are difficult to learn. Most of the time, to generalise an architecture during learning, known geometric deformations such as scaling, rotation or shearing are applied. 
```

> However, there is no mechanism to help the model learn the geometric variations. The data augmentation is therefore limited by the user's knowledge. The proposed mechanism is end-to-end, adaptable to each architecture containing CNNs and allows CNNs to learn more complex deformations.

Reviewer: > The data augmentation is therefore limited by the user's knowledge.

It's not quite clear to me what the _user's knowledge_ is supposed to be here. Do you mean the user's expertise to implement possibly more complex geometrical transformation? I think that sentence deserves to be explained a bit more.

&nbsp; 
# Method

## Basic convolution and limitation

The following illustration is a simple convolution with a kernel size of $$ 3 \times 3$$ and a stride of $$1 \times 1$$. This calculation can be written as follows:

$$ y(p_0) = \sum_{p_n \in R}w(p_n) \cdot x(p_0 + p_n) $$

> With $$p_n$$, The receptive field of the predefined convolution in the grid $$ R $$. In this specific case, the grid is equal to:

Reviewer: Capitalization + phrasing to make the definition more clear:
```suggestion
with $$p_n$$ being the receptive field of the predefined convolution in the grid $$ R $$. In this specific case, the grid is equal to:
```

$$ R = \{ (-1,-1), (-1, 0), (0, -1), ..., (0, 1), (1, 0), (1, 1) \} $$

> The grid $$ R $$ is static during training and inference. Thus the recepteive field of classical convolution is limited. To increase it, the kernel size, the pitch or the number of cascaded convolution can be increased.

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
The grid $$ R $$ is static during training and inference. Thus the receptive field of classical convolution is limited. To increase it, the kernel size, the pitch or the number of cascaded convolution can be increased.
```

In the proposed approach, the convolution operation can be rewritten as follows:

$$ y(p_0) = \sum_{p_n \in R}w(p_n) \cdot x(p_0 + p_n + \Delta p_n) $$

$$ \Delta p_n $$ correspond to the learnable grid. For $$ 3 \times 3$$ convolution, we have:

$$ R = \{ (\Delta {x^1}, \Delta {y^1}), (\Delta {x^2}, \Delta {y^2})), ..., (\Delta {x^9}, \Delta {y^9}) \} $$

In practice, additional layers are added to learn these components. For a $$ 3 \times 3 $$ convolution, 18 additional parameters are learned. The illustration below shows the mechanism:

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/deformable_convolution_illustration.jpg)

An interesting point is that the sampling position is adaptable to the geometric transformation, especially in the sub-images below (c,d), where scaling and rotation have been applied.

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/sampling_location.jpg)

In this scenario, the sample positions do not need to be integers. For fast calculation, the bilinear interpolation is implemented as follows:

$$ x(p) = \sum_q max(0,1 - |p_x - q_x| ) \cdot max(0,1 - |p_y - q_y| )\cdot x(q)$$

With $$ p = p_0 + p_n + \Delta p_n$$.
&nbsp;

> ## Deformable RoI Pooling (for Region Proposol Network)

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
## Deformable RoI Pooling (for Region Proposal Network)
```

**RoI pooling**

> The same principle can be applied on pooling operation. Basic average RoI pooling is given by the following equation:

Reviewer: Word:
```suggestion
The same principle can be applied to the pooling operation. Basic average RoI pooling is given by the following equation:
```

> $$ y(i,j) = \sum_{p \in bin(i, j)} \frac{ x(p_0 + p_n)}{n_{ij}} $$ 

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure, but since we're talking about averaging here, I think the division is meant to be _outside_ the sum, and not applied on each element of the sum. Though I must admit that the original paper is not clear on that front...

P.S. This comment also applies to the next equations.

Author: I am not 100% sure, but I think we can speak about RoI average pooling because the $$ n_{i,j}$$ is function of the coordonate. If this value is constant it can be out of the sum and it will produce the same result. We can discuss this later :)

> With $$bin(i,j)$$ the size of the grid surrounding the pixel at coordonate $$ (i, j) $$. Such as for deformable convolution, we add an extra learnable parameters:

Reviewer: bin(i,j) is not the size of the grid (that would be n_{ij}), but rather the offsets for all coordinates in the bin.

Author: absolutely right!

> With $$bin(i,j)$$ the size of the grid surrounding the pixel at coordonate $$ (i, j) $$. Such as for deformable convolution, we add an extra learnable parameters:

Reviewer: > Such as for deformable convolution [...]

does not really make sense, and I'm not certain what you meant to say. Maybe something like
> When defining RoI pooling using deformable convolutions [...]

?:
```suggestion
With $$bin(i,j)$$ the size of the grid surrounding the pixel at coordonate $$ (i, j) $$. When defining RoI pooling using deformable convolutions, we add an extra learnable parameters:
```

Author: Actually, my sentence doesn't make sense. I'll change it. Thank you! :)

> With $$ bin(i,j) $$ the grid surrounding the pixel at coordonate $$ (i,j) $$, and $$ n_{ij} $$ the size of the grid surrounding the pixel at coordonate $$ (i, j) $$. An additional layer is added to learn the offset as for deformable convolution:

Author: Perfect! It's better like that!

 
 $$ y(i,j) = \sum_{p \in bin(i, j)} \frac{ x(p_0 + p_n + \Delta p_{ij})}{n_{ij}} $$

Illustration below shows the mechanism:

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/roi_pooling.jpg)

**Position-Sensitive (PS) RoI Pooling**

> Instead of applying pooling in the input feature maps, they are converted in $$k^2\cdot (C+1)$$, 

Reviewer: > applying in the input feature maps

Do you mean _on_ the input feature maps?

```suggestion
Instead of applying pooling on the input feature maps, they are converted in $$k^2\cdot (C+1)$$, 
```

Author: That's right!

> with $$k$$ the size of the output, C the number of classes and +1 for the background.

Reviewer: I feel like a word is missing here.

> they are converted in [...]

gives a number, but not a number of _what_. Do you mean something like
> they are converted to k^2 (C + 1) new feature maps

?

> with $$k$$ the size of the output, C the number of classes and +1 for the background.

Author: Sorry I forgot! (:

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/PS_roi_pooling.jpg)

The major difference can be shown in the following equation:

$$ y(i,j) = \sum_{p \in bin(i, j)} \frac{ x_{ij}(p_0 + p_n + \Delta p_{ij})}{n_{ij}} $$

Where $$ x(i,j) $$ is this time learned by the convolutional layer and depends on the class.

# Experiment

> Experiments were achieved on different kind of architecture and applications:

Reviewer: Word + plural:
```suggestion
Experiments were performed on different kinds of architectures and applications:
```

> * Add Deformable ConvNets in features extractor network (ResNet-101):

Reviewer: In the context of _feature extraction_, feature is normally singular:
```suggestion
* Add Deformable ConvNets in feature extractor network (ResNet-101):
```

> * Connect it to different networks for different application:

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
* Connect it to different networks for different applications:
```

    * DeepLab (segmentation).
    * Category-Aware  (object detection - 2 classes only).
    * Faster R-CNN (object detection).

 **Quantitative results**

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/table_results.jpg)

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/atrou_deformable_module.jpg)

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/tab_res_recepteive_field.jpg)

Remarks on table 2:
* The receptive field sizes of deformable filters are correlated with object sizes, indicating that the deformation is effectively learned from
image content.

> * The filter sizes on the background region are between those on medium and large objects, indicating that a relatively large receptive field is necessary for recognizing the background regions.

Reviewer: Plural:
```suggestion
* The filter sizes on background regions are between those on medium and large objects, indicating that a relatively large receptive field is necessary for recognizing background regions.
```

**Qualitative results**

![](/collections/images/DeformableConvolutionalNetworks/sampling_location_img.jpg)

# Conclusions

> * The work proposed a significantly improved in accuracy for image classficiation and object detection task.

Reviewer: Sentence is not constructed correctly. Maybe something like:
```suggestion
* The proposed method significantly improves the accuracy for image classficiation and object detection tasks.
```
